welcome to topcast and to the second
part of my series on
[Music]
kind of about a discussion between sam
harris and max tegmark that was had
years ago on the making sense podcast in
this part of the discussion we're mainly
focused on mathematics and the
philosophy of mathematics and how we
come to know mathematics and a lot of
what i would say are
misconceptions from the mathematician's
misconception tend to creep in here the
mathematician's misconception is that
the brain or the mind rather of a human
being and especially of the
mathematician
has privileged access to mathematical
certainty or mathematical truth in some
way that the way in which mathematical
knowledge is created or the theorems of
mathematics come to be known to
mathematicians is something other than
this fallible method of conjecture and
refutation that there is some other way
of gaining insight into absolutely
necessary truth or certain truth or
something like that this is the
mathematician's misconception that
mathematics doesn't require a physical
computation in order for us to come to
understand it but that's just wrong all
knowledge mathematical scientific moral
political whatever it happens to be
has to be arrived at via a human mind
which is running on a computer which is
obeying the laws of physics and the laws
of physics mandate that you will have
errors now and again that's simply
unavoidable that's just the way
knowledge is generated via this method
of error correction identifying the
errors and then correcting them and
that's what motivates all of knowledge
creation finding some problem or error
in the existing theories or even
theorems and then improving on them
there is no final knowledge there's no
way of tying up with a little bow what
we have discovered in any area there
will always be open questions we're
always just at the beginning of infinity
beginning to scratch the surface of our
understanding of reality now early on in
the discussion i think you can hear a
sense of confusion coming through one
thing i would say is that people
struggle with this idea
that
number mathematics the theorems or
whatever you want to call it these
objects of mathematics have an existence
have an independent existence and when i
say that i just mean that well these
things these truths
aren't made of atoms material stuff is
made of atoms but if you are committed
to being a materialist or a physicalist
and this is the idea that you will only
grant existence to things made of atoms
or stuff in the physical world that is
made of physical stuff you kind of get
yourself tied up into knots then because
you're talking about let's say the laws
of physics which you might grant exist
they're not made of material stuff
they're not made of particles or
anything like that they're not even made
of space or energy they are the
explanations of space and energy they're
the things that control what's going on
in a certain sense so if you're a
physicalist you're automatically
believing in or you're endorsing the
existence of something that's not made
of matter or are you i don't know some
physicalist maybe deny that the laws of
physics are real things as well you get
some strange ideas among people who
practice professional philosophy what i
like to say is things like numbers
exist they have independent existence
they exist abstractly they're not made
out of matter and then people say hmm
abstractly it sounds like you're a
platonus that these objects of
mathematics have some sort of existence
outside of the physical world but where
is this other realm of this platonic
realism and that's the wrong question
that question actually doesn't make any
sense it makes as much sense to me as
asking what i was doing
decades before my grandfather was born i
mean grammatically it's a correct
sentence but it's referring to something
that didn't exist and it doesn't exist
and it couldn't exist and it just makes
no logical sense it's illogical when you
actually try and think through what's
going on it's the same as what was
happening before
time was created now if you have an
explanation of the beginning of time
asking about what happened before time
likewise doesn't make any sense asking
what's outside of all of space likewise
makes no sense you're asking for an
explanation of the spaces outside of
space you're just postulating more space
i would say that the same kind of thing
is a mistake when we say where is this
realm of abstract reality well it's not
anywhere it just exists the physical
world consists of
space-time and the stuff in it energy
and matter so that's what the physical
world is and there are places in the
physical world and there are times in
the physical world if you like but the
abstract world that's not made of
space-time it's not made of energy and
matter it consists of truths
abstractions drawn from that physical
world but they're not part of the
physical world they're not made of that
physical world but we come to understand
these abstract things
using our minds which themselves are
abstractions so it's perfectly okay
to say something
has an existence without being able to
place it in time and space that's
perfectly fine in fact you kind of get a
sense that sam is almost getting this at
first he seems to be suggesting that
an idea of platonism the the idea that
this abstract reality exists in some way
now i'm not really sure exactly it
depends on who you ask right when you
ask different platonists what their
version of platonism is some of them
will talk about a physical space of some
kind which as i say i think it's a
category error when you start talking
about physical spaces of abstract stuff
well how do you marry these two things
together that doesn't really make any
sense abstract spaces are different to
physical spaces sam almost gets there
because later on in the conversation i
think we'll get there today
he actually talks about an example that
i invoke myself very very often and that
is the example of what is the next
highest prime number at the moment we
know you can look go to wikipedia and
you can find out what is the highest
known prime number and they'll give you
a number a very very large number now we
happen to know as a matter of proof
there are infinitely many primes now the
next one yet to be discovered it exists
it absolutely exists and the one after
that and the one after that an infinite
number of prime numbers exist
but where
well certainly not in the physical world
not made out of any atoms they haven't
been instantiated represented anywhere
anywhere in existence yet but they must
exist because we can
come to discover them we're not
inventing them we are discovering these
things people are searching for them
literally searching searching where
searching through abstract space the
abstract space of numbers computers are
working hard grinding away right now to
try and locate in that space that
infinite space mind you the next prime
number the next highest prime number
that will hold the record until such
time as the one after that is discovered
then the one after that and so on it
goes this continual discovering of this
landscape out there now we exist in
physical reality and we are used to
physical reality this is not to say that
there can't be these other landscapes
that we can come to understand more and
more sam invokes one himself the moral
landscape and i would say that's also
quite right we can imagine a moral
landscape of well-being by whatever
definition i also like to invoke
geron leniere's concept of a disciplined
duelist here i like to think of myself
as a disciplined duelist that
we can say that these abstract things
exist but not much more than that we can
come to have a better and better
understanding of this abstract reality
but not much more than that and asking
questions that are about the location in
time and space in other words where in
physical space is the abstract stuff is
just a category error now some people
are upset about that but again it's
making the mistake of assuming
that there is only one kind of thing the
stuff made out of matter that exists in
space-time but that's wrong that's just
wrong there are such things as emergent
stuff which are beyond merely matter
beyond merely atoms there's something
else going on we know they exist because
they are invoked when we explain the
world using our best explanations and
what do we say
a thing exists insofar as it features in
our best explanations and not otherwise
and when we say it exists we mean we
know it exists what else could we mean
and sometimes things that we think exist
turn out not to exist like the force of
gravity and flood justin and elaine
vitale these things scientifically in
the history were thought to exist and
then we found they didn't exist we had a
better theory that ruled those things
out and instead postulated other stuff
space-time and
oxygen and information and evolution by
natural selection that kind of stuff
exists now we know it exists now do we
know absolutely for sure
that it will never be overturned any of
that stuff no but that's not what saying
something exists means this is the
distinction between
ontology what ultimately absolutely is a
matter of final truth exists in some way
shape or form to which we don't have
access
and epistemology our knowledge of
physical reality and we have access to
physical reality and to abstract reality
and all the other domains in which we
might consider our knowledge applicable
ways in which we can come to understand
reality broadly we have access to that
via epistemology
but always approximately and always in a
way that leaves more and more questions
for us to continue to answer and make
progress and this this distinction
between ontology and mathematics what
really truly exists and our knowledge of
what really truly exists this
distinction here
is also where the mathematician's
misconception comes in and one of my
favorite lines from the fabric of
reality sums up this entire notion and
that line is
necessary truth is merely the subject
matter of mathematics
necessary truth is not the reward we get
for doing mathematics
so it's the distinction between and i've
said this before on topcast between
whatever the fundamental constituents of
matter really really are and our
knowledge of the fundamental
constituents of matter at any given time
now that the history of that just shows
that we continue to find smaller and
smaller staff now it used to be thought
that atoms were the smallest thing and
then we found out that they were
subatomic stuff protons neutrons and
electrons and then we found out well
even the protons and neutrons are made
of these things called quarks and now
people are saying well maybe the quarks
are made out of strings and so
our knowledge of the ultimate
constituents of matter at any particular
time is imperfect it leaves open
questions we do not know the final
ultimate constituents of matter particle
physics isn't about finding the ultimate
constituents of matter instead it's
about finding our best explanation of
what we know the constituents of matter
are at any given time at any given time
we know the constituents of matter but
not perfectly not finally that's not
what no means that's not what knowledge
is it's not about a final completed
science it's about explaining
what we know at any given time so too
with mathematics but this is very poorly
understood in particular by
mathematicians and hence the
mathematician's misconception that david
deutch talks about it is mistaking
mistaking our knowledge of the necessary
truths of mathematics with the necessary
truths themselves if you could grok the
necessary truths in and of themselves
that would be inerrant but how would you
get this inerrant knowledge how would
you escape from the fallibility of the
human mind how would you escape from the
fact that whatever your mind is doing as
a matter of physics is a physical
process whenever it's doing mathematics
or performing a calculation or a
computation that is the action of
neurons made of atoms obeying laws of
physics the quantum laws of physics and
the quantum laws of physics
introduce error into the system
uncertainty all the time that's just a
law of physics and laws of physics are
primary they rule over everything
including brains including what brains
do they constrain how perfect our
knowledge of anything can be and that
includes mathematics but the
mathematician's misconception is no we
can escape that when we're doing
mathematics are we getting when we're
doing mathematics we can actually
grasp ultimate truth and this is simply
wrong among other things
mathematics produces theorems via a
method of proof and the method of proof
must begin somewhere with the axioms but
you don't know the axioms are true
of course some people will say how could
they be otherwise well i would just
implore anyone listening to this who
wonders about how could it be otherwise
to go to my discussion with naval there
at the naval podcast where i talk about
precisely this thing and i invoke the
idea of people thinking how could it be
otherwise that two dots drawn on a piece
of paper would have a unique line going
through them how could it possibly be
otherwise how could euclidean geometry
possibly be otherwise how could we have
a geometry different to this that's the
history of mathematics of common sense
of logic of people
even thinking they've found absolutely
secure foundations absolutely unarguable
it could not possibly be otherwise this
is logically proved
well even those things can be overturned
the history of mathematics philosophy
logic tells us this so this is our topic
for today and as i say
mainly it's me talking already it's been
about 15 minutes of just me talking
but let me bring you a little bit of
what sam has to say and then some of
what max has to say on precisely this
topic of the relationship between
mathematics and the physical world and
i'm going to pick it up where sam is
talking about that most famous of papers
eugene wigner's on the unreasonable
effectiveness of mathematics and the
physical sciences
i want to linger on this question of the
pro but the primacy of mathematics and
the
strange utility of mathematics at one
point in your book you cite
the the off-cited paper by um wigner who
i think he wrote in uh in the 60s about
right in a paper entitled the
unreasonable uh
the the unreasonable effectiveness of
mathematics in the natural sciences
and this is something that many
scientists have remarked on this there
seems to be a kind of mysterious
property of these abstract structures
and chains of reasoning where
mathematics seems uniquely
useful for describing the physical world
and
making predictions about things that you
would never anticipate but for the fact
that the mathematics is suggesting that
something uh should be so and that's
right
this has lured many scientists into
essentially mysticism or the fairly
philosophical platonism and sometimes
even religion positing
mathematical structure that exists or
even you know pure mathematical concepts
like numbers that exist in some almost
platonic state beyond the human mind and
i'm wondering if you share some of that
mathematical idealism and i just wanted
to get your reaction to a
an idea that i believe i got from a
cognitive scientist who lived and i
think he died in the 40s maybe the 50s
kenneth craig who published a book in
1943 where he i think it just in passing
he this anticipates wigner by about 20
years but in passing he tried to resolve
this this mystery about the utility of
mathematics and he simply speculated
that there was a there must be some
isomorphism between brain processes that
represent the physical world
and processes in the world that are
represented and that this might account
for the utility of mathematical concepts
i think you more or less ask you know is
it really so surprising that certain
patterns of brain activity
that are in fact what mathematical
concepts are at the level of the human
brain
can be mapped onto the world there's
some kind of sameness of structure or
homology there does that
does that go any direction toward
resolving this mystery for you or do you
think it exceeds that
so it's a few things there i want to
pick up on
but one is the there seems to be this
and sam does this
rather frequently
conflating brain with mind and then
saying something like well mathematics
at the level of the brain just is a
certain pattern of neural firings
no
that's the wrong level of analysis
the mathematics is an abstract kind of
thing
it is an understand our knowledge of
mathematics is an understanding and an
understanding is not
just a pattern of neural firings
for one thing one day
in principle it's possible to take the
mind out of the brain so there will be
no neurons whatsoever and instead you'll
be instantiated in silicon a mine can be
instantiated in silicon and then what do
we say the mathematics is identical to
the transistors switching on and off i
would still say no it's the wrong level
of analysis it's like saying that the
events of history are nothing but the
movement of atoms that's wrong
yes movement of atoms were happening but
if you want to understand understand not
merely predict as we like to say then
you have to distinguish between these
things
neural firings are neural firings and
there are all sorts of neural firings
neural firings happen when you move your
leg neural firings happen when you
digest your dinner neural firings happen
when you think of artistic things
and when you think of mathematical
things and when you think of scientific
things
but if the fact that it's all neural
phonics doesn't mean that those things
all reduced to neural virus that would
be that would make them all identical
namely that'll just be neural firings
but they're not just neural firings
there's something special about
particular patterns of neural firings
and it's the patterns the abstractions
how those abstractions are represented
in the neurons which is the really
interesting thing because you can
instantiate
mathematical truth mathematical
explanations just like you can with any
knowledge in different physical forms
you can write it down on pieces of paper
as ink does that mean the mathematics is
identical to the scribbles of ink on the
paper no
you can say out loud pythagoras theorem
does that make pythagoras theorem
identical to the sound waves no
it has its independent existence it's
it's there in the squiggles when you
write it on a piece of paper it's there
in these sound waves when you speak the
theorem it's there when you think it in
neural firings it's it's represented in
all these different ways and from those
different ways we abstract out the
common thing
that common thing being pythagoras
theorem which has this independent
existence independent of each of these
things
in what sense is it independent because
it's not identical to any one of those
things
where does it exist then well it exists
in each of those forms but not identical
to those forms but where where is the
actual pythagorean theorem that's the
wrong question it doesn't exist in space
it just exists as an abstraction as an
abstraction and we only have access to
that abstraction once we come to an
understanding of it the same is true of
the next highest prime number the next
highest prime number we will be able to
write down on paper if we like to
presumably be many thousands of pieces
of paper you could write it down on
someone could say it out loud that would
be ridiculous and probably take their
lifetime or something we can put it as
pixels on a screen
that's all these different ways of
representing this number and all these
different representations they have one
thing in common they all represent the
one thing the abstraction which is that
prime number and the other thing there
is this mystery about exactly why it is
that mathematics should be useful in
describing the physical world
i think this is over eggs sometimes but
here's an answer here's an into that
kind of thing
firstly all the laws of physics are
computable they're not incomputable the
functions are all computable which is
really interesting they're these
analytical functions and so because the
laws of physics as we know them
we can
use them to make predictions in the
world well then that gives them a
mathematical structure that they are
computable the interesting thing about
farming you look at you listen to
richard feynman talk about this and he
thinks that it doesn't necessarily need
to be the case that in the future
laws of physics necessarily have to have
this mathematical character in the way
we think of mathematics today which is a
really there's a there's a lecture out
there on the difference between
mathematics and physics he talks about
this it's quite a famous lecture you can
find it on youtube and just towards the
end of that lecture he actually makes
some remarks about how he thinks the
final law of physics or something like
that you know theory of everything
whatever might not even be written in
mathematics or at least the mathematics
as we would think of it today i must say
that there is possible and i know i've
often made the hypothesis that physics
ultimately will not require a
mathematical statement that the
machinery ultimately will be revealed
just a prejudice like one of these other
prejudices
it always bothers me that in spite of
all this local business
what goes on in a tiny is no matter how
tiny a region of space and no matter how
tiny a region of time according to the
laws as we understand them today takes
the computing machine an infinite number
of logical operations to figure out now
how can all that be going on in that
tiny space
that why should it take an infinite
amount of logic to figure out what one
stinky tiny bit of space time is going
to do
and so i made the hypothesis often that
the laws are going to turn out
to be in the end
simple like the checkerboard and all the
complexities from size
but that is of the same nature as the
other speculations that other people
make it says i like it you don't like it
it's not good to be too prejudiced about
this thing
really curious you know maybe kind of
like we think about constructor theory
now maybe there will be a formalism of
constructor theory in terms of
sophisticated mathematical apparatus
perhaps indeed there will be but feynman
is sort of hinting at well you know
ultimate
greater grander deeper theories might
not need to have this same kind of
mathematical character but the tradition
in physics of course is
that we go towards we tend in the
direction of more sophisticated
mathematics and so now we're at string
theory where the mathematics is
exceedingly complex and people struggle
to understand it and
to some extent many physicists are
saying you know well they're not
seemingly making any progress by the
measure of
generating testable predictions
and this is why you know a whole bunch
of them turn around and say well
it doesn't matter that doesn't matter
we're still doing science well
yeah but
testable predictions allows you to do
things not just like test the theory
against rivals but also
generate stuff like technology so
actually make practical benefits for
humanity not to say that you know
mathematics and string theory or
couldn't possibly have any benefits to
humanity of course it could but
problem solving requires solving
physical problems now there is this
problem with unifying general theory of
relativity and quantum theory yeah and
so string theory is an attempt to do
that but the attempt's been going on for
many decades now and out of that well
where's the testable prediction we don't
have one what is the new piece of
technology that a company can latch on
to and to actually make a profit out we
don't have any this is a bit of an issue
and it's one of the motivations for
something like constructor theory a new
approach something different that makes
some testable predictions that might
actually lead towards certain kinds of
technology who knows we're still at the
beginnings here okay string theory's had
its few decades let's give constructor
theory a few decades equal time
so that's one thing
the other issue of why it is that
mathematics should be so effective in
the physical sciences well sam kind of
gets at it there and i use the term
self-similarity and david deutsch uses
in the fabric of reality this term
self-similarity and we had a great hint
of this in his lectures that he's given
his ted lectures that he's given this
idea that the human mind has this
capacity to generate
models
models and explanations within itself
that are of the rest of physical reality
so you have this kind of one-to-one
correspondence between explanations
claims about reality and the reality
itself and so this is the whole idea of
quasars you know the david invokes
quasars and the discussion of quasars
that here's this object on the other
side of the universe
obeying
the extreme limits of the laws of
physics as we understand them you know
stars being swallowed whole by these
black holes ripped apart and generating
these huge jets that if they're directed
in our direction we can detect as
quasars now that physics
as david says is so unlike the physics
of the human brain it's just almost
unimaginable so go to his ted talks to
hear more about that from his
perspective but the magnificent thing is
that our understanding of quasars
comes to resemble what's really going on
in quasars with increasing fidelity over
time the one structure inside the mind
the model of the quasar comes to more
faithfully represent the real physical
thing out there in reality over time
that's the really cool thing and that's
that's kind of what understanding is
that's what understanding is so let's
hear what uh max tegmark has to say
about all of this
[Music]
it's an interesting argument the
argument that our brain adapts to the
work has a world model inside of the
brain that our brain is just clearly
part of the world and yeah so there are
processes in the world and there are
processes in the world that that have a
by virtue of what brains are right uh
have a sameness of fit and kind of a
mapping so i agree with the first part
of the argument and disagree with the
second part i i agree that it's natural
that there will be things in the brain
that are very similar to what's
happening in the world precisely because
the brain has evolved to have a good
world model
but i disagree that this fully answers
the whole question because
the the claim that uh he made there that
you could that you mentioned that
brain processes of certain kinds is
effectively what mathematics is that's
something that most
most mathematicians i know would
violently disagree with
that math has something to do with brain
processes at all
they think of math rather as structures
which have nothing to do with the brain
well let's just pull the breaks there
though because clearly your experience
of doing math
your
your grasp of mathematical concepts or
not the moment something makes sense or
you you persist in your confusion your
memory of the multiplication table your
ability to do basic algebra and
everything on right up
all of that is in every instance of it's
being realized is being realized as a
state of your brain or you're not
disputing that of course absolutely i'm
just quibbling about but how you what
the what mathematics is what's your
definition of mathematics
so they're both talking past each other
i would say here and they're both
talking past the most parsimonious way
of just sorting out this confusion and
the confusion is the distinction between
the subject matter and our knowledge of
the subject matter ontology and
epistemology the real existence of
mathematical structures mathematical
objects things like numbers and our
knowledge of those things now our
knowledge of those things
is going on or the creation of the
knowledge of those things is going on
inside of our minds absolutely that's
where the creation is taking place
that's what makes human beings people so
unique so special in the entire universe
that we can
do this process of create explanatory
knowledge but it's an imperfect process
it's a process of conjecturing guessing
about the reality that's out there and
one of the realities that's out there is
mathematical reality the reality of
necessary truths of absolutely certain
perfect number but we can't grasp
absolute perfection we can only guess at
it we guess at it we fumble our way
through by error correcting
this is the remarkable thing now it's
whatever the the thing is that exists by
the way the thing that exists might be
matter the material world there's an m
for you it could be mathematics come to
understand the truths of mathematics
better but we're guessing at that we're
guessing at the material we're guessing
it moral truth as well sam talks about
the moral landscape and we can come to
understand that moral landscape ever
better
what about meditation there's another
one this meditation this process of
meditation is a process of coming to
understand the mind you're not yet
another m
coming to understand the mind ever
better coming to understand your own
mind and your problems and your your
difficulties and whatever else and the
action of thoughts as thoughts but
imperfectly by the way
just because you are there in your first
person meditating doesn't mean that you
have a privileged best understanding of
what the heck's going on now certainly
it can help but sometimes you will not
need to discuss with someone else
because they can have better insight
into exactly what you're thinking and
why that's a curious thing right about
ourselves we we tend to think we have
this high opinion of ourselves we go
well i'm the one with my thoughts so i
understand my thoughts really well do
you do you really
you have a lot of thoughts you know it's
very hard to kind of keep track of
everything you're thinking and why
you're thinking it and which thoughts
you're thinking over and over again and
we make mistakes all the time i can tell
you one thing when i make these podcasts
and i i think i'm saying something
really clearly and i think i've spoken
just exactly the way i want to speak i
go back and i edit and i've said exactly
the wrong word i think i've said the
word let's say mathematics and in fact
i've said the word morality how
ridiculous and so i have to edit stuff
and change my mind but if you had asked
me immediately after having made the
sentence i would have said something
like oh no mathematics is a domain of
necessary truths and yet and i would
have insisted that this is what i really
thought i said and then you play back
the tape and i've actually said morality
is the set of necessary truths or
something like that i've made a mistake
i can be totally wrong about the
contents of my own mind just a second
ago
and i think we can be systematically
wrong about our own minds as well by the
way we can just continually tell
ourselves we've got the right idea and
in fact we've got the wrong idea we're
just not thinking clearly and
this is one reason for talking to
friends and talking to other people and
talking to councillors and talking to
wise older people and trying to come to
a better understanding of your own ideas
what you think are your own ideas okay
that's a little bit off topic but what
i'm saying here is that everyone
understands seemingly this distinction
but when we get into the realm of
mathematics it it becomes
some area of confusion and what sam and
max would benefit from is simply
recognizing this distinction that the
mathematicians again the mathematicians
misconception they think they've got
access to this final ultimate truth and
that what's going on inside of their
brains is the mathematics it like is the
set of necessary truths now you you've
come to an understanding of the
necessary truths but it's going to
contain error and misconceptions that we
can always come to a deeper
understanding of these things a deeper
interesting now when i say that we can
have errors and misconceptions in our
knowledge it doesn't mean that for any
particular claim like let's say one plus
one equals two people like to bring this
thing sort of thing up you know say how
could that possibly be wrong how could
you possibly have an error about that
well when i say error i just mean that
you don't have the deepest possible
understanding of it you think you know
what 1 plus 1 equals 2 means i'm not
saying that i know there's something
wrong about that claim can i doubt the
veracity of that i can doubt it i can i
can doubt that you have a complete
understanding of what that really
entails for one thing among many it was
a surprise to me at university learning
that you could actually do this
thing that proves one plus one equals
two and it takes you about an a4 page of
handwritten argumentation from the
axioms using pinots uh pinots axioms and
reaching the conclusion that one plus
one equals two okay that that requires
there's a method of proof there so that
is it once you've done that you have a
deeper understanding in a sense of what
one plus one equals two means now what
is one what is two
and by the way like david deutsch says
you know like what does equals mean
because it can't mean exactly the same
as after all just write down 1 plus 1
equals 2 and notice on the left hand
side you've got this symbol 1 and you've
got this symbol plus and you've got this
symbol 1 again well that's not exactly
the same as the symbol you've got on the
right hand side which just is the
numeral two so these two things are not
exactly the same so equals can't mean
that
so there's all sorts of ways we can
approach what the difference is between
an absolutely necessary truth which is
the subject matter of mathematics and
our understanding of these things which
is where the confusion is i would say a
little bit between what sam is saying
what max is saying what they're both
saying and they're not quite coming to
what i think is a clear distinction and
what other mathematicians i would say
have on this point we
come to imperfectly understand
mathematics we refine that understanding
over time and all of our knowledge of
mathematics is generated by our brains
which is running on minds which are
obeying laws of physics which introduce
errors as a matter of physical law
okay let's keep going and listening to a
little bit more from max
absolutely i'm just quibbling about but
how you what what mathematics is what's
your definition of mathematics and i
think it's interesting to take a step
back and ask what do mathematicians do
they generally define
math as
because if you go ask
people on the street you know like my
mom for example they will often
view math as just a bag of tricks for
manipulating numbers or maybe as a
sadistic form of torture invented by
school teachers to ruin our
self-confidence
whereas mathematicians
they talk about mathematical structures
and studying their properties i have a
colleague here at mit for example who
has spent 10 years of his life studying
this mathematical structure called e8
never mind what it is exactly but he has
a poster of it he's on the wall of his
office david vogen
and if i
went and suggested to him that
that thing on his wall
is just something he made up somehow
that he invented
he would be very offended he feels he
discovered it but it was out there and
he discovered that it was out there
and and mapped out its properties in
exactly the same way that we discovered
the planet
neptune
rather than invented the planet neptune
right and then went out to
study its properties similarly if you
look at something more familiar than e8
you just look at the the county numbers
one two three four five etc you know the
fact that two plus two is four
and four plus two is six
most mathematicians would argue that the
structure
this mathematical structure that we call
the numbers
is not the structure that we
invented or invented properties of but
rather that we discovered the properties
of
in different cultures
this has been discovered multiple times
independently in each culture people
invented rather than discovered a
different language for describing it you
know in english you say one two three
four five
in swedish
the language i grew up with you say et
tv
but
you can if you use the swedish english
dictionary and translate between the two
you see that these are two equivalent
descriptions of exactly the same
structure
and um similarly we invent symbols what
symbol you use to write the number two
and three is
actually different in the u.s
versus in india today or in the roman
empire right
but again once you have your
dictionaries there you see that
there's still only one structure that we
discover and then we invent languages
yeah right to just drive this home with
one better example your plate though
right he was really fascinated about
these very regular
geometric shapes i couldn't agree more
perfect exactly right that's what i
would like to be able to say as well
just as clearly you know i i endorse
everything there i think he's got it
exactly right what we would also add he
goes on to use the example of plato
plato had the platonic solids he wasn't
free to just invent more platonic solids
once he'd discovered the ones that
existed in other words mathematics kicks
back it has this independent reality
that once you discover some part of it
whether it's e8 or the platonic solids
or just the natural numbers they have
this autonomous set of properties that
you come to understand over time by
making more and more discoveries
generating more knowledge about that
particular thing so that's exactly right
and we know it exists we know this stuff
exists by
as david deutch talks about in the
fabric of reality that these things kick
back that's dr johnson's criterion what
does kickback mean well it does
something kind of unpredictable that you
prod it a little bit and it gives you
back some kind of information about
itself so in the case of you know just
the normal natural counting numbers well
it gives you back this weird unexpected
kind of thing of
the the prime numbers the distribution
of prime numbers is kind of weird when
the next one is going to crop up is kind
of weird not the highest one at any
given point and then the next highest
one these things are out there to be
discovered so you start off with this
simple set of assumptions the the axioms
of simple arithmetic and you end up with
the natural numbers and you end up with
the prime numbers of infinite kind of
complexity in a certain way and they
exist these things exist by the measure
that they feature in our best
explanations of reality
our explanations of reality include well
the capacity to count stuff to calculate
to compute and so then we end up with
the revealed richness of things like
prime numbers among other things okay so
we'll go on and listen to what sam has
to say about this
you know what is the the highest prime
number above the current one we know
well clearly there's an answer to that
question if you mean the lowest prime
number above all the ones we know oh yes
oh sorry yes the next prime number yeah
yeah that number will be discovered
rather than invented and to invent it
would be to
invent it perfectly within the
constraints of its being in fact the
next prime number so it's not wrong to
call that pure discovery more or less
analogous as you said to finding neptune
when you didn't know it existed or going
to the continent of africa you know it's
africa is there whether you've been
there or not right so i agree with that
but it still seems true to say that
every instance of
these operations being performed every
instance of mathematical insight every
prime number being thought about or
located or having
every one of those moments has been a
moment of a brain doing its mathematical
thing right so i'm just going for a
computer sometimes yes we have in fixing
a large number of proofs now done by
machines right and discoveries also
sometimes we're still talking about
physical systems that can play this game
of discovery in this mathematical space
that we were talking about this
fundamental mystery is that why should
mathematics be
so
useful for describing the physical world
and for making predictions about blank
spaces on the map and exactly
again
and i'm kind of stumbling
into this conversation because i'm not a
mathematician i'm not a mathematical
philosopher and so i'm sort of you know
shooting from the hip here with you but
i just wanted to get a sense of whether
this could remove some of the mystery if
in fact you have certain physical
processes in brains and computers and
other intelligent systems wherever they
are that can mirror this landscape of
potential discovery if that does sort of
remove what otherwise seems a little
spooky and platonic and
represents a challenge for mapping you
know abstract idealized concepts onto a
physical universe yeah that's a great
question and you know the answer you're
going to get to that question
will depend dramatically on who you ask
there are
very very smart and respectable people
who
come down all across the very broad
spectrum of views on this and in my book
i chose to not you know
say this is how it is but rather to
explore the whole spectrum of opinions
so some people will say if you ask them
about this mystery there is no mystery
you know
there is math is sometimes useful in
nature sometimes it's not that's it
there's nothing to
mysterious about it
go away and
then
if you go a little bit more towards the
platonic side you'll find a lot of
people saying things like um
well
it seems like a lot of things in our
universe are very accurately
approximated by math and that's great
but they're still not
perfectly described by math and then
then you have some very very uh
optimistic physicists
like einstein and a lot of string
theorists who think that there actually
is some math that we haven't maybe
discovered yet that doesn't just
approximate our physical world but
describes it exactly and is the perfect
description
of it and then finally the the most
extreme position on the other side which
i explore at length in in
the book and that's the one that i'm
personally ingesting on
it is that not only is
our world described by mathematics but
it is mathematics
in the sense that the two are really the
same so you talked about how in the
physical world
we discover
new entities and then we invent language
to describe them similarly in
mathematics we discover new entities
like new prime numbers
atomic solids and we invent names from
maybe
this mathematical
reality and the physical rally are
actually one in the same and and the
reason
why when you first hear that and you
know it sounds completely looney tunes
of course
you know you look
it it's equivalent to saying that the
physical world doesn't just have some
mathematical properties but it has only
mathematical properties and that sounds
really dumb when you
if you look at your wife or your child
or whatever and you you're like this
doesn't look like a bunch of numbers
but
to me as a physicist and when i look at
them
of course when i
met annika your wife for the first time
of course she has all these properties
that don't strike me as mathematical
don't tell me you were noticing my
wife's mathematical properties
[Laughter]
but at the same time as a physicist you
know i couldn't help notice that your
wife was made entirely out of quarks and
electrons
and uh
what property does an electron actually
have well it has the property minus one
one half one and so on and we we've made
up nerdy names for these properties we
physicists such as electric charge spin
and lepton number but the electron
doesn't care what language we invent to
describe these numbers
the properties are just these numbers
just mathematical properties
so
all is number this is the pythagorean
idea but essentially
the true reality of the physical world
we inhabit is actually
reducible to mathematics in some way but
i just think well
this is metaphysics this is a preferred
metaphysical claim now saying there that
the electron has these properties
described by numbers minus 1 1 and so on
and so forth
that is saying that the object is the
properties
but i just think that's wrong
i think that we can always come to a
deeper understanding of these things
what is an electron after all well the
physicists have refined their
understanding of this thing over time it
began as a particle and they said a wave
now we think of this idea of fungible
instances of the electron this particle
i don't think we're going to get to the
ultimate final answer as to what an
electron is now as for saying that
ultimately an electron reduces to
nothing but the mathematics of an
electron well again it's a metaphysical
claim
and people have preferred metaphysics
but i don't know
why they in fact have preferred
metaphysics and why physicists want to
say well i think it's just to sell books
maybe that's what it comes down to it's
like that you make a strong claim that
everything is reducible to mathematics
and um
you sell more books because people want
to argue against you now i don't have a
strong opinion on this i just think that
it's one of these claims where there's
little point arguing about it because
there's no way of testing at the moment
the truth of this matter well one thing
i would say is that it just doesn't
comport with what i understand about the
rest of physical reality which is that
we come to a
deeper and deeper understanding of it
over time that if for example string
theory describes
what fundamental particles are so-called
fundamental particles they wouldn't be
fundamental anymore the strings would be
the fundamental things then we would
have a deeper understanding of the
electron that's a certain vibration of a
string but then you would say well
what's the string made out of you know
ultimately what is that and
people of the future physics of the
future i would imagine would come down
in one some way shape or form in saying
well actually the strings are made out
of this other stuff and so on it goes
because like we say here we're at the
beginning of infinity we're at the
beginning of our understanding of things
but max is kind of postulating and many
physicists do this
what the ultimate end game is
so they think there's an end game i
think the end of science is coming i
think the end of physics is coming and
narrowly the theoretical physicists have
this
fixation on the final completed physics
unify a few more things unify the forces
and then one or two steps beyond that
you get to the final ultimate end point
i just don't think that's going to work
i think there's going to always be open
questions there's always going to be a
question as to why
why and if you're saying
that this abstract stuff which we call
mathematics
the knowledge of mathematics itself is
abstract the mathematical things
themselves are abstractions for all the
reasons i talked about earlier if you're
saying that's what physics ultimately is
then then physical spaces in some sense
reduced to abstract spaces and then the
question about where this abstract space
is
actually is a meaningful question you
know here it is here it is we're
occupying an abstract not a physical
space anymore
but then we just have we're presented
with the same list of questions you know
you're still going to have the question
about
the origins of the universe is still
going to come up you're still going to
have the question about
dark energy you're still going to have
questions about what the fate of the
universe was now are there other
logically possible universes that we can
access in some way let me pick it up
just for a few more minutes with max and
then i'll say a few more things and
we'll tidy it up for today
[Music]
and if you take seriously that
everything in both your wife and in the
world is made of these elementary
particles that have
only mathematical properties
then you can ask what about the space
itself then that these particles are in
you know what properties does space have
well it has the property three
for starters you know the number of
dimensions
which again is just a number einstein
discovered it also has some one
properties called curvature and topology
but they're mathematical too and if if
both space itself
and all the stuff in space
have only mathematical properties then
it starts to sound a little bit less
ridiculous the idea that maybe
everything is completely mathematical
and we're actually part of this enormous
mathematical object
okay so we'll end it there for today but
what i would just say about that is i
think it's the same mistake that was
being made earlier i think it's just
confusing
knowledge of something a mathematical
knowledge of physical structures with
the structures themselves that's all
that our descriptions our use of these
mathematical labels for certain
properties
are not identical to the properties i
think that's just wrong
saying that the electron and the quark
differ only in these properties it's
just to say our way of describing
differences between these things
involves numbers so for example you say
something like an electron has a charge
of minus one where certain quarks have a
charge of plus one third so but that
does that explain what charge is that
charge is just literally numbers well i
don't think so because if you're saying
that then you're also saying well the
mass of the electron is what it is and
the mass of the quark is what it is but
that doesn't explain what mass is
it doesn't explain what charge is either
and how charges behave that that that
part of the explanation is obscured from
you if you're just going to say well
they're nothing but these numbers then
explain why there should be attraction
between things or not or repulsion
between things or not now feynman grey
gave this great explanation as to why
for example electrons when brought close
together tend to repel one another
because they're emitting photons towards
each other well that's an explanation
but it's not reducible just to the
number properties you need natural
language in order to come to an
understanding of this stuff to to
explain what the numbers mean
and the numbers are just being invoked
as part of the explanation but to say to
then go that step further and say well
the explanation these parts of the
explanation are not only just explaining
what's going on here it is what's going
on here as a matter of final fact that
the electron is just a set of numbers
it's confusing knowledge of with the
thing in itself the thing in itself you
don't have a perfect understanding of we
should know now that we don't have a
perfect understanding of particle
physics for one thing particle physics
is part of quantum theory and quantum
theory doesn't quite mesh with general
relativity so we know we've got progress
yet to make problems yet to solve okay
but that's where i think we'll leave it
today we'll move on from mathematics
next time to
some other part of the discussion i
don't want to go through the entire
discussion i think you get a sense now
of the way in which i'm approaching this
but again it is nice to see how
i would suggest that just picking up the
book's fabric of reality in the
beginning of infinity do give you this
as i like to talk about this coherent
world view and so you're able to
spot misconceptions and spot errors and
kind of feel in a sense a little bit
more clear in your thinking about
certain things that where others tend to
encounter confusions and trip ups you
may not this is certainly not to say we
have all the answers absolutely not it's
just that when you have a way of meshing
together the philosophy epistemology
morality mathematics physics computation
and all of these other things it allows
you to error correct more easily and
more easily move in these subjects even
if you're not necessarily a top-notch
expert and i don't regard myself as a
top-notch expert in physics i'm a lay
person i'm not a top-notch expert in
populion epistemology i would say i'm
not a top-notch expert in astronomy or
anything else but i tend to be able to
spot the errors spot the errors in
thinking because ah this thing conflicts
with that thing which we know is the
case because of our best existing
explanation and this thing conflicts
with that thing and that can't be right
because again conflicts with our best
known explanation so when people start
deviating from what is known as a matter
of our best explanation our best current
understanding and when you know that the
view they're espousing has already been
refuted in some way by some other
thinkers then it's an interesting way to
sort of look at some of these
discussions but still fascinating still
very very interesting and not saying
it's all together wrong
certainly not a lot of what max has said
here today and a lot of what sam has
said here today i completely agree with
this is really interesting those areas
where we part ways so to speak because
of a different deeper philosophy and
especially understanding of epistemology
but until next time bye-bye
[Music]
you